"Text"@"Title"@"Group"
"TITLE: Francisco Goya Francisco José de Goya y Lucientes ; Spanish: [fɾanˈθisko xoˈse ðe ˈɣoʝa i luˈθjentes]; 30 March 1746 – 16 April 1828 was a Spanish romantic painter and printmaker. He is considered the most important Spanish artist of the late 18th and early 19th centuries. His paintings, drawings, and engravings reflected contemporary historical upheavals and influenced important 19th- and 20th-century painters. Goya is often referred to as the last of the Old Masters and the first of the moderns. Goya was born in Fuendetodos, Aragon to a middle-class family in 1746. He studied painting from age 14 under José Luzán y Martínez and moved to Madrid to study with Anton Raphael Mengs. He married Josefa Bayeu in 1773. Goya became a court painter to the Spanish Crown in 1786 and this early portion of his career is marked by portraits of the Spanish aristocracy and royalty, and Rococo-style tapestry cartoons designed for the royal palace. Although Goya's letters and writings survive, little is known about his thoughts. He had a severe and undiagnosed illness in 1793 that left him deaf, after which his work became progressively darker and more pessimistic. His later easel and mural paintings, prints and drawings appear to reflect a bleak outlook on personal, social, and political levels and contrast with his social climbing. He was appointed Director of the Royal Academy in 1795, the year Manuel Godoy made an unfavorable treaty with France. In 1799, Goya became Primer Pintor de Cámara Prime Court Painter, the highest rank for a Spanish court painter. In the late 1790s, commissioned by Godoy, he completed his La maja desnuda, a remarkably daring nude for the time and clearly indebted to Diego Velázquez. In 1800–01, he painted Charles IV of Spain and His Family, also influenced by Velázquez. In 1807, Napoleon led the French army into the Peninsular War against Spain. Goya remained in Madrid during the war, which seems to have affected him deeply. Although he did not speak his thoughts in public, they can be inferred from his Disasters of War series of prints although published 35 years after his death and his 1814 paintings The Second of May 1808 and The Third of May 1808. Other works from his mid-period include the Caprichos and Los Disparates etching series, and a wide variety of paintings concerned with insanity, mental asylums, witches, fantastical creatures and religious and political corruption, all of which suggest that he feared for both his country's fate and his own mental and physical health. His late period culminates with the Black Paintings of 1819–1823, applied on oil on the plaster walls of his house the Quinta del Sordo House of the Deaf Man where, disillusioned by political and social developments in Spain, he lived in near isolation. Goya eventually abandoned Spain in 1824 to retire to the French city of Bordeaux, accompanied by his much younger maid and companion, Leocadia Weiss, who may have been his lover. There he completed his La Tauromaquia series and a number of other works. Following a stroke that left him paralyzed on his right side, Goya died and was buried on 16 April 1828 aged 82.    Early years 1746–1771   Francisco de Goya was born in Fuendetodos, Aragón, Spain, on 30 March 1746 to José Benito de Goya y Franque and Gracia de Lucientes y Salvador. The family had moved that year from the city of Zaragoza, but there is no record of why; likely, José was commissioned to work there. They were lower middle-class. José was the son of a notary and of Basque origin, his ancestors being from Zerain, earning his living as a gilder, specialising in religious and decorative craftwork. He oversaw the gilding and most of the ornamentation during the rebuilding of the Basilica of Our Lady of the Pillar Santa Maria del Pilar, the principal cathedral of Zaragoza. Francisco was their fourth child, following his sister Rita b. 1737, brother Tomás b. 1739 who was to follow in his father's trade and second sister Jacinta b. 1743. There were two younger sons, Mariano b. 1750 and Camilo b. 1753. His mother's family had pretensions of nobility and the house, a modest brick cottage, was owned by her family and, perhaps fancifully, bore their crest. About 1749 José and Gracia bought a home in Zaragoza and were able to return to live in the city. Although there are no surviving records, it is thought that Goya may have attended the Escuelas Pías de San Antón, which offered free schooling. His education seems to have been adequate but not enlightening; he had reading, writing and numeracy, and some knowledge of the classics. According to Robert Hughes the artist seems to have taken no more interest than a carpenter in philosophical or theological matters, and his views on painting ... were very down to earth: Goya was no theoretician. At school he formed a close and lifelong friendship with fellow pupil Martín Zapater; the 131 letters Goya wrote to him from 1775 until Zapater's death in 1803 give valuable insight into Goya's early years at the court in Madrid.    Visit to Italy  At age 14 Goya studied under the painter José Luzán, where he copied stamps for 4 years until he decided to work on his own, as he wrote later on paint from my invention. He moved to Madrid to study with Anton Raphael Mengs, a popular painter with Spanish royalty. He clashed with his master, and his examinations were unsatisfactory. Goya submitted entries for the Real Academia de Bellas Artes de San Fernando in 1763 and 1766 but was denied entrance into the academia.  Rome was then the cultural capital of Europe and held all the prototypes of classical antiquity, while Spain lacked a coherent artistic direction, with all of its significant visual achievements in the past. Having failed to earn a scholarship, Goya relocated at his own expense to Rome in the old tradition of European artists stretching back at least to Albrecht Dürer. He was an unknown at the time and so the records are scant and uncertain. Early biographers have him travelling to Rome with a gang of bullfighters, where he worked as a street acrobat, or for a Russian diplomat, or fell in love with a beautiful young nun whom he plotted to abduct from her convent. It is possible that Goya completed two surviving mythological paintings during the visit, a Sacrifice to Vesta and a Sacrifice to Pan, both dated 1771. In 1771 he won second prize in a painting competition organized by the City of Parma. That year he returned to Zaragoza and painted elements of the cupolas of the Basilica of the Pillar including Adoration of the Name of God, a cycle of frescoes for the monastic church of the Charterhouse of Aula Dei, and the frescoes of the Sobradiel Palace. He studied with the Aragonese artist Francisco Bayeu y Subías and his painting began to show signs of the delicate tonalities for which he became famous. He befriended Francisco Bayeu and married his sister Josefa he nicknamed her Pepa on 25 July 1773. Their first child, Antonio Juan Ramon Carlos, was born on 29 August 1774. Of their seven children only one, a son named Javier, survived into adulthood.    Madrid 1775–1789   Francisco Bayeu Josefa Bayeu's brother, 1765 membership of the Real Academia de Bellas Artes de San Fernando, and directorship of the tapestry works from 1777 helped Goya earn a commission for a series of tapestry cartoons for the Royal Tapestry Factory. Over five years he designed some 42 patterns, many of which were used to decorate and insulate the stone walls of El Escorial and the Palacio Real del Pardo, the residences of the Spanish monarchs. While designing tapestries was neither prestigious nor well paid, his cartoons are mostly popular in a rococo style, and Goya used them to bring himself to wider attention. The cartoons were not his only royal commissions and were accompanied by a series of engravings, mostly copies after old masters such as Marcantonio Raimondi and Velázquez. Goya had a complicated relationship with the latter artist; while many of his contemporaries saw folly in Goya's attempts to copy and emulate him, he had access to a wide range of the long-dead painter's works that had been contained in the royal collection. Nonetheless, etching was a medium that the young artist was to master, a medium that was to reveal both the true depths of his imagination and his political beliefs. His c. 1779 etching of The Garrotted Man El agarrotado was the largest work he had produced to date, and an obvious foreboding of his later Disasters of War series.  Goya was beset by illness, and his condition was used against him by his rivals, who looked jealously upon any artist seen to be rising in stature. Some of the larger cartoons, such as The Wedding, were more than 8 by 10 feet, and had proved a drain on his physical strength. Ever resourceful, Goya turned this misfortune around, claiming that his illness had allowed him the insight to produce works that were more personal and informal. However, he found the format limiting, as it did not allow him to capture complex color shifts or texture, and was unsuited to the impasto and glazing techniques he was by then applying to his painted works. The tapestries seem as comments on human types, fashion and fads. Other works from the period include a canvas for the altar of the Church of San Francisco El Grande in Madrid, which led to his appointment as a member of the Royal Academy of Fine Art.    Court painter   In 1783, the Count of Floridablanca, favorite of King Charles III, commissioned Goya to paint his portrait. He became friends with the King's half-brother Luis, and spent two summers working on portraits of both the Infante and his family. During the 1780s, his circle of patrons grew to include the Duke and Duchess of Osuna, the King and other notable people of the kingdom whom he painted. In 1786, Goya was given a salaried position as a painter to Charles III. Goya was appointed court painter to Charles IV in 1789. The following year he became First Court Painter, with a salary of 50,000 reales and an allowance of 500 ducats for a coach. He painted portraits of the king and the queen, and the Spanish Prime Minister Manuel de Godoy and many other nobles. These portraits are notable for their disinclination to flatter; his Charles IV of Spain and His Family is an especially brutal assessment of a royal family. Modern interpreters view the portrait as satirical; it is thought to reveal the corruption behind the rule of Charles IV.  Under his reign his wife Louisa was thought to have had the real power, and thus Goya placed her at the center of the group portrait. From the back left of the painting one can see the artist himself looking out at the viewer, and the painting behind the family depicts Lot and his daughters, thus once again echoing the underlying message of corruption and decay. Goya earned commissions from the highest ranks of the Spanish nobility, including Pedro Téllez-Girón, 9th Duke of Osuna and his wife María Josefa Pimentel, 12th Countess-Duchess of Benavente, José Álvarez de Toledo, Duke of Alba and his wife María del Pilar de Silva, and María Ana de Pontejos y Sandoval, Marchioness of Pontejos. In 1801 he painted Godoy in a commission to commemorate the victory in the brief War of the Oranges against Portugal. The two were friends, even if Goya's 1801 portrait is usually seen as satire. Yet even after Godoy's fall from grace the politician referred to the artist in warm terms. Godoy saw himself as instrumental in the publication of the Caprichos and is widely believed to have commissioned La maja desnuda.    Middle period 1793–1799   La Maja Desnuda La maja desnuda has been described as the first totally profane life-size female nude in Western art without pretense to allegorical or mythological meaning. The identity of the Majas is uncertain. The most popularly cited models are the Duchess of Alba, with whom Goya was sometimes thought to have had an affair, and Pepita Tudó, mistress of Manuel de Godoy. Neither theory has been verified, and it remains as likely that the paintings represent an idealized composite. The paintings were never publicly exhibited during Goya's lifetime and were owned by Godoy. In 1808 all Godoy's property was seized by Ferdinand VII after his fall from power and exile, and in 1813 the Inquisition confiscated both works as 'obscene', returning them in 1836 to the Academy of Fine Arts of San Fernando. In 1798 he painted luminous and airy scenes for the pendentives and cupola of the Real Ermita Chapel of San Antonio de la Florida in Madrid. His depiction of a miracle of Saint Anthony of Padua is devoid of the customary angels and instead treats the miracle as if it were a theatrical event performed by ordinary people.  At some time between late 1792 and early 1793, an undiagnosed illness left Goya deaf. He became withdrawn and introspective while the direction and tone of his work changed. He began the series of aquatinted etchings, published in 1799 as the Caprichos—completed in parallel with the more official commissions of portraits and religious paintings. In 1799 Goya published 80 Caprichos prints depicting what he described as the innumerable foibles and follies to be found in any civilized society, and from the common prejudices and deceitful practices which custom, ignorance, or self-interest have made usual. The visions in these prints are partly explained by the caption The sleep of reason produces monsters. Yet these are not solely bleak; they demonstrate the artist's sharp satirical wit, as in Capricho number 52, What a Tailor Can Do While convalescing between 1793 and 1794, Goya completed a set of eleven small pictures painted on tin that marked a significant change in the tone and subject matter of his art, and drew from the dark and dramatic realms of fantasy nightmare. Yard with Lunatics is a vision of loneliness, fear and social alienation. The condemnation of brutality towards prisoners whether criminal or insane is a subject that Goya assayed in later works that focused on the degradation of the human figure. It was one of the first of Goya's mid-1790s cabinet paintings, in which his earlier search for ideal beauty gave way to an examination of the relationship between naturalism and fantasy that would preoccupy him for the rest of his career. He was undergoing a nervous breakdown and entering prolonged physical illness, and admitted that the series was created to reflect his own self-doubt, anxiety and fear that he was losing his mind. Goya wrote that the works served to occupy my imagination, tormented as it is by contemplation of my sufferings. The series, he said, consisted of pictures which normally find no place in commissioned works. Goya's physical and mental breakdown seems to have happened a few weeks after the French declaration of war on Spain. A contemporary reported, The noises in his head and deafness aren't improving, yet his vision is much better and he is back in control of his balance. These symptoms may indicate a prolonged viral encephalitis, or possibly a series of miniature strokes resulting from high blood pressure and which affected the hearing and balance centres of the brain. Symptoms of tinnitus, episodes of imbalance and progressive deafness are typical of Ménière's disease. It is possible that Goya had cumulative lead poisoning, as he used massive amounts of lead white—which he ground himself—in his paintings, both as a canvas primer and as a primary colour. Other postmortem diagnostic assessments include Susac's syndrome or may point toward paranoid dementia, possibly due to brain trauma, as evidenced by marked changes in his work after his recovery, culminating in the black paintings. Art historians have noted Goya's singular ability to express his personal demons as horrific and fantastic imagery that speaks universally, and allows his audience to find its own catharsis in the images.    Peninsular War 1808–1814  The French army invaded Spain in 1808, leading to the Peninsular War of 1808–1814. The extent of Goya's involvement with the court of the intruder king, Joseph I, the brother of Napoleon Bonaparte, is not known; he painted works for French patrons and sympathisers, but kept neutral during the fighting. After the restoration of the Spanish King Ferdinand VII in 1814, Goya denied any involvement with the French. By the time of his wife Josefa's death in 1812, he was painting The Second of May 1808 and The Third of May 1808, and preparing the series of etchings later known as The Disasters of War Los desastres de la guerra. Ferdinand VII returned to Spain in 1814 but relations with Goya were not cordial. The artist completed portraits of the king for a variety of ministries, but not for the king himself. Although Goya did not make his intention known when creating The Disasters of War, art historians view them as a visual protest against the violence of the 1808 Dos de Mayo Uprising, the subsequent Peninsular War and the move against liberalism in the aftermath of the restoration of the Bourbon monarchy in 1814. The scenes are singularly disturbing, sometimes macabre in their depiction of battlefield horror, and represent an outraged conscience in the face of death and destruction. They were not published until 1863, 35 years after his death. It is likely that only then was it considered politically safe to distribute a sequence of artworks criticising both the French and restored Bourbons. The first 47 plates in the series focus on incidents from the war and show the consequences of the conflict on individual soldiers and civilians. The middle series plates 48 to 64 record the effects of the famine that hit Madrid in 1811–12, before the city was liberated from the French. The final 17 reflect the bitter disappointment of liberals when the restored Bourbon monarchy, encouraged by the Catholic hierarchy, rejected the Spanish Constitution of 1812 and opposed both state and religious reform. Since their first publication, Goya's scenes of atrocities, starvation, degradation and humiliation have been described as the prodigious flowering of rage.  His works from 1814 to 1819 are mostly commissioned portraits, but also include the altarpiece of Santa Justa and Santa Rufina for the Cathedral of Seville, the print series of La Tauromaquia depicting scenes from bullfighting, and probably the etchings of Los Disparates.    Quinta del Sordo and Black Paintings 1819–1822   Records of Goya's later life are relatively scant, and ever politically aware, he suppressed a number of his works from this period, working instead in private. He was tormented by a dread of old age and fear of madness. Goya had been a successful and royally placed artist, but withdrew from public life during his final years. From the late 1810s he lived in near-solitude outside Madrid in a farmhouse converted into a studio. The house had become known as La Quinta del Sordo The House of the Deaf Man, after the nearest farmhouse that had coincidentally also belonged to a deaf man. Art historians assume Goya felt alienated from the social and political trends that followed the 1814 restoration of the Bourbon monarchy, and that he viewed these developments as reactionary means of social control. In his unpublished art he seems to have railed against what he saw as a tactical retreat into Medievalism. It is thought that he had hoped for political and religious reform, but like many liberals became disillusioned when the restored Bourbon monarchy and Catholic hierarchy rejected the Spanish Constitution of 1812. At the age of 75, alone and in mental and physical despair, he completed the work of his 14 Black Paintings, all of which were executed in oil directly onto the plaster walls of his house. Goya did not intend for the paintings to be exhibited, did not write of them, and likely never spoke of them. Around 1874, 50 years after his death, they were taken down and transferred to a canvas support by owner Baron Frédéric Émile d'Erlanger. Many of the works were significantly altered during the restoration, and in the words of Arthur Lubow what remain are at best a crude facsimile of what Goya painted. The effects of time on the murals, coupled with the inevitable damage caused by the delicate operation of mounting the crumbling plaster on canvas, meant that most of the murals suffered extensive damage and loss of paint. Today, they are on permanent display at the Museo del Prado, Madrid.    Bordeaux October 1824 – 1828   Leocadia Weiss née Zorrilla, 1790–1856, the artist's maid, younger by 35 years, and a distant relative, lived with and cared for Goya after Bayeu's death. She stayed with him in his Quinta del Sordo villa until 1824 with her daughter Rosario. Leocadia was probably similar in features to Goya's first wife Josefa Bayeu, to the point that one of his well-known portraits bears the cautious title of Josefa Bayeu or Leocadia Weiss. Not much is known about her beyond her fiery temperament. She was likely related to the Goicoechea family, a wealthy dynasty into which the artist's son, Javier, had married. It is known that Leocadia had an unhappy marriage with a jeweler, Isidore Weiss, but was separated from him since 1811, after he had accused her of illicit conduct. She had two children before that time, and bore a third, Rosario, in 1814 when she was 26. Isidore was not the father, and it has often been speculated—although with little firm evidence—that the child belonged to Goya. There has been much speculation that Goya and Weiss were romantically linked; however, it is more likely the affection between them was sentimental. Goya died on 16 April 1828. Leocadia was left nothing in Goya's will; mistresses were often omitted in such circumstances, but it is also likely that he did not want to dwell on his mortality by thinking about or revising his will. She wrote to a number of Goya's friends to complain of her exclusion but many of her friends were Goya's also and by then were old men or had died, and did not reply. Largely destitute, she moved into rented accommodation, later passing on her copy of the Caprichos for free. Goya's body was later re-interred in the Real Ermita de San Antonio de la Florida in Madrid. Goya's skull was missing, a detail the Spanish consul immediately communicated to his superiors in Madrid, who wired back, Send Goya, with or without head.    Goya's influence on modern and contemporary artists and writers  Goya is often referred to as the last of the Old Masters and the first of the moderns. Among the 20th-century painters influenced by Goya are the Spanish masters Pablo Picasso and Salvador Dalí who drew influence from Los caprichos and the Black Paintings of Goya. In the 21st century, American postmodern painters such as Michael Zansky and Bradley Rubenstein draw inspiration from The Dream of Reason Produces Monsters 1796–98 and Goya's Black Paintings. Zanksy's Giants and Dwarf Series 1990–2002 of large-scale paintings and wood carvings use imagery from Goya. Goya's influence has extended beyond the visual arts:  The Spanish composer Enrique Granados wrote a suite for solo piano in 1911 based on Goya's paintings called Goyescas, and later wrote an opera of the same name based on the suite. Spanish author Fernando Arrabal's novel The Burial of the Sardine was inspired by Goya's painting. Russian poet Andrei Voznesensky's I Am Goya was inspired by Goya's anti-war paintings. The video game Impasto was based on the works of Goya. In 2024, an extensive exhibition of Goya's etchings was held at the Norton Simon Museum in Southern California.    Films and television  Goya: Crazy Like a Genius 2002, a documentary by Ian MacMillan, presented by Robert Hughes Goya's Ghosts 2006, directed by Miloš Forman Volavérunt 1999, directed by Bigas Luna and based on the novel by Antonio Larreta Goya in Bordeaux 1999, Spanish historical drama film written and directed by Carlos Saura about the life of Francisco de Goya Goya or the Hard Way to Enlightenment 1971 German: Goya – oder der arge Weg der Erkenntnis is a 1971 East German drama film directed by Konrad Wolf. It was entered into the 7th Moscow International Film Festival where it won a Special Prize. It is based on a novel with the same title by Lion Feuchtwanger. The Naked Maja 1958, directed by Henry Koster. A film about the painter Francisco Goya and the Duchess of Alba; Anthony Franciosa played Goya and Ava Gardner played the Duchess. Tiempo de ilustrados Time of the Enlightened in the series The Ministry of Time.  Goya played by Pedro Casablanc must repaint La maja desnuda after a cult called the Exterminating Angels destroy it.    See also  Francisco Goya's tapestry cartoons List of works by Francisco Goya    References     Footnotes     Citations     Further reading  Baticle, Jeannine. Goya: Painter of Terrible Splendor, Abrams Discoveries series. New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1994 Buchholz, Elke Linda. Francisco de Goya. Cologne: Könemann, 1999. ISBN 3-8290-2930-6 Cascardi, Anthony J. Francisco de Goya and the Art of Critique. New York:  Zone Books, 2023. Ciofalo, John J. The Self-Portraits of Francisco Goya. Cambridge University Press, 2002 Connell, Evan S. Francisco Goya: A Life. New York: Counterpoint, 2004. ISBN 978-1-58243-307-3 Eitner, Lorenz. An Outline of 19th Century European Painting. New York: Harper & Row, 1997. ISBN 978-0-0643-2977-4 Gassier, Pierre. Goya: A Biographical and Critical Study. New York: Skira, 1955 Gassier, Piere and Juliet Wilson. The Life and Complete Work of Francisco Goya. New York 1971. Glendinning, Nigel. Goya and his Critics. New Haven 1977. Glendinning, Nigel. The Strange Translation of Goya's Black Paintings. The Burlington Magazine, Volume 117, No. 868, 1975 Hagen, Rose-Marie & Hagen, Rainer. Francisco Goya, 1746–1828. London: Taschen, 1999. ISBN 978-3-8228-1823-7 Havard, Robert. Goya's House Revisited: Why a Deaf Man Painted his Walls Black. Bulletin of Spanish Studies, Volume 82, Issue 5 July 2005 Hennigfeld, Ursula ed.. Goya im Dialog der Medien, Kulturen und Disziplinen. Freiburg: Rombach, 2013. ISBN 978-3-7930-9737-2 Hilt, Douglas. Goya: Turmoils of a Patriot History Today Aug 1973, Vol. 23 Issue 8, pp 536–545, online Hughes, Robert. Goya. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 2004. ISBN 978-0-394-58028-9 Junquera, Juan José. The Black Paintings of Goya. London: Scala Publishers, 2008. ISBN 1-85759-273-5 Kravchenko, Anastasiia. Mythological subjects in Francisco Goya's work. 2019 Licht, Fred S. Goya in Perspective. New York 1973. Licht, Fred. Goya: The Origins of the Modern Temper in Art. Universe Books, 1979. ISBN 0-87663-294-0 Litroy, Jo. Jusqu'à la mort. Paris: Editions du Masque, 2013. ISBN 978-2702440193 Martín-Estudillo, Luis. Goya and the Mystery of Reading. Nashville: Vanderbilt University Press, 2023. ISBN 082-6505325 Matar, Hisham and Salomon, Xavier. Goya's Forge. The Frick Collection, 2025. ISBN 978-1-913875-52-7 Symmons, Sarah. Goya: A Life in Letters. Pimlico, 2004. ISBN 978-0-7126-0679-0 Tomlinson, Janis. Francisco Goya y Lucientes 1746–1828. London: Phaidon, 1994. ISBN 978-0-7148-3844-1 Tomlinson, Janis. Burn It, Hide It, Flaunt It: Goya's Majas and the Censorial Mind. The Art Journal, Volume 50, No. 4, 1991    External links   Francisco Goya's Cats www.FranciscoGoya.com Goya in Aragon Foundation: Online catalogue Goya, the Secret of the Shadows Archived 16 August 2011 at the Wayback Machine, a documentary film by David Mauas, Spain, 2011, 77' Goya: The Most Spanish of Artists, Museum of Fine Arts, Boston Caprichos PDF. Archived from the original PDF on 30 October 2008. Retrieved 27 March 2005. 10.0 MB PDF in the Arno Schmidt Reference Library Archived 20 November 2008 at the Wayback Machine Desastres de la guerra PDF. Archived from the original PDF on 20 November 2008. Retrieved 27 March 2005. 10.6 MB PDF in the Arno Schmidt Reference Library Archived 20 November 2008 at the Wayback Machine Etching series by Goya Goya y Lucientes, Francisco . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 12 11th ed.. 1911. p. 303. His Majesty's Giant Anteater – A New Goya is Discovered Bibliothèque numérique de l'INHA – Estampes de Francisco de Goya Goya in the Metropolitan Museum of Art, an exhibition catalog from The Metropolitan Museum of Art fully available online as PDF Prints & People: A Social History of Printed Pictures, an exhibition catalog from The Metropolitan Museum of Art fully available online as PDF, which contains a significant amount of material on the prints of Goya Francisco Goya Prints in the Claremont Colleges Digital Library Goya hidden micro-signatures, a revolutionary discovery A Closer Look at Francisco Goya's 'Disasters of War' Spanish title: 'Los Desastres de la Guerra' Goya an exhibition organized by the Fundación Amigos del Museo del Prado, the Museo Nacional del Prado, Madrid exhibited 30 October 2001–9 February 2002, and the National Gallery of Art, Washington, D. C. exhibited 10 March–2 June 2002 Goya and the Altamira Family 2014 exhibition at the Metropolitan Museum of Art Goya: The Portraits 2015 exhibition at the National Gallery, London Goya’s Graphic Imagination 2021 exhibition at the Metropolitan Museum of Art; catalog by Mark McDonald ISBN 978-1-588-39714-0"@"Francisco Goya"@"romanticism"




"Eugène Delacroix Ferdinand Victor Eugène Delacroix  DEL-ə-krwah, -⁠KRWAH; French: [øʒɛn dəlakʁwa]; 26 April 1798 – 13 August 1863 was a French Romantic artist who was regarded as the leader of the French Romantic school. In contrast to the Neoclassical perfectionism of his chief rival Ingres, Delacroix took for his inspiration the art of Rubens and painters of the Venetian Renaissance, with an attendant emphasis on colour and movement rather than clarity of outline and carefully modelled form. Dramatic and romantic content characterized the central themes of his maturity, and led him not to the classical models of Greek and Roman art, but to travel in North Africa, in search of the exotic. Friend and spiritual heir to Théodore Géricault, Delacroix was also inspired by Lord Byron, with whom he shared a strong identification with the forces of the sublime, of nature in often violent action. However, Delacroix was given to neither sentimentality nor bombast, and his Romanticism was that of an individualist. In the words of Baudelaire, Delacroix was passionately in love with passion, but coldly determined to express passion as clearly as possible. Together with Ingres, Delacroix is considered one of the last old Masters of painting and is one of the few who was ever photographed. As a painter and muralist, Delacroix's use of expressive brushstrokes and his study of the optical effects of colour profoundly shaped the work of the Impressionists, while his passion for the exotic inspired the artists of the Symbolist movement. A fine lithographer, Delacroix illustrated various works of William Shakespeare, the Scottish author Walter Scott, and the German author Johann Wolfgang von Goethe.    Early life   Eugène Delacroix was born on 26 April 1798 at Charenton-Saint-Maurice in Seine, near Paris. His mother was Victoire Oeben, the daughter of the cabinetmaker Jean-François Oeben. He had three much older siblings. Charles-Henri Delacroix 1779–1845 rose to the rank of General in Napoleon's army. Henriette 1780–1827 married the diplomat Raymond de Verninac Saint-Maur 1762–1822. Henri was born six years later. He was killed at the Battle of Friedland on 14 June 1807. There are medical reasons to believe that Eugène's legal father, Charles-François Delacroix, was not able to procreate at the time of Eugène's conception. Talleyrand, who was a friend of the family and successor of Charles Delacroix as Minister of Foreign Affairs, and whom the adult Eugène resembled in appearance and character, considered himself as his real father. After assuming his office as foreign minister, Talleyrand dispatched Charles Delacroix to The Hague in the capacity of French ambassador to the then Batavian Republic. Delacroix, who at the time suffered from erectile dysfunction, returned to Paris in early September 1797, only to find his wife pregnant. Talleyrand went on to assist Eugène in the form of numerous anonymous commissions. Throughout his career as a painter, he was protected by Talleyrand, who served successively the Restoration and king Louis-Philippe, and ultimately as ambassador of France in Great Britain, and later by Charles Auguste Louis Joseph, duc de Morny, half-brother of Napoleon III, Grandson of Talleyrand, and speaker of the French House of Commons. His legitimate father, Charles Delacroix, died in 1805, and his mother in 1814, leaving 16-year-old Eugène an orphan.  His early education was at the Lycée Louis-le-Grand, and at the Lycée Pierre Corneille in Rouen where he steeped himself in the classics and won awards for drawing. In 1815 he began his training with Pierre-Narcisse Guérin in the neoclassical style of Jacques-Louis David. An early church commission, The Virgin of the Harvest 1819, displays a Raphael-esque influence, but another such commission, The Virgin of the Sacred Heart 1821, evidences a freer interpretation. It precedes the influence of the more colourful and rich style of the Flemish Baroque painter Peter Paul Rubens, and fellow French artist Théodore Géricault, whose works marked an introduction to Romanticism in art. The impact of Géricault's The Raft of the Medusa was profound, and stimulated Delacroix to produce his first major painting, The Barque of Dante, which was accepted by the Paris Salon of 1822. The work caused a sensation, and was largely derided by the public and officialdom, yet was purchased by the State for the Luxembourg Galleries; the pattern of widespread opposition to his work, countered by a vigorous, enlightened support, would continue throughout his life. Two years later he again achieved popular success for his The Massacre at Chios.    Career     Chios and Missolonghi   Delacroix's painting of Chios Massacre during the Greek civil wars of 1823–1825 shows dying Greek civilians rounded up for enslavement by the Ottoman Empire. This is one of several paintings he made of contemporary events, expressing the official policy for the Greek cause in Greek War of Independence against the Turks, the English, the Russians, and the French governments. Delacroix was quickly recognized by the authorities as a leading painter in the new Romantic style, and the picture was bought by the state. His depiction of suffering was controversial, however, as there was no glorious event taking place, no patriots raising their swords in valour as in David's Oath of the Horatii, only a disaster. Many critics deplored the painting's despairing tone; the artist Antoine-Jean Gros called it a massacre of art. The pathos in the depiction of an infant clutching its dead mother had an especially powerful effect, although this detail was condemned as unfit for art by Delacroix's critics. A viewing of the paintings of John Constable and the watercolour sketches and art of Richard Parkes Bonnington prompted Delacroix to make extensive, freely painted changes to the sky and distant landscape.  Delacroix produced a second painting in support of the Greeks in their war for independence, this time referring to the capture of Missolonghi by Turkish forces in 1825. With a restrained palette appropriate to the allegory, Greece Expiring on the Ruins of Missolonghi depicts a woman in Greek costume with her breast bared, arms half-raised in an imploring gesture before the horrific scene: the suicide of the Greeks, who chose to kill themselves and destroy their city rather than surrender to the Turks. A hand is visible at the bottom, the body having been crushed by rubble. The painting serves as a monument to the people of Missolonghi and to the idea of freedom against tyrannical rule. This event interested Delacroix not only for his sympathies with the Greeks, but also because the poet Byron, whom Delacroix greatly admired, had died there.    Romanticism   A trip to England in 1825 included visits to Thomas Lawrence and Richard Parkes Bonington, and the colour and handling of English painting provided impetus for his only full-length portrait, the elegant Portrait of Louis-Auguste Schwiter 1826–30. At roughly the same time, Delacroix was creating romantic works of numerous themes, many of which would continue to interest him for over thirty years. By 1825, he was producing lithographs illustrating Shakespeare, and soon thereafter lithographs and paintings from Goethe's Faust. Paintings such as The Combat of the Giaour and Hassan 1826, and Woman with Parrot 1827, introduced subjects of violence and sensuality which would prove to be recurrent. These various romantic strands came together in The Death of Sardanapalus 1827–28. Delacroix's painting of the death of the Assyrian king Sardanapalus shows an emotionally stirring scene alive with colours, exotic costumes and tragic events. The Death of Sardanapalus depicts the besieged king watching impassively as guards carry out his orders to kill his servants, concubines and animals. The literary source is a play by Byron, although the play does not specifically mention any massacre of concubines. Sardanapalus' attitude of calm detachment is a familiar pose in Romantic imagery in this period in Europe. The painting, which was not exhibited again for many years afterward, has been regarded by some critics as a gruesome fantasy involving death and lust. Especially shocking is the struggle of a nude woman whose throat is about to be cut, a scene placed prominently in the foreground for maximum impact. However, the sensuous beauty and exotic colours of the composition make the picture appear pleasing and shocking at the same time. A variety of Romantic interests were again synthesized in The Murder of the Bishop of Liège 1829. It also borrowed from a literary source, this time Scott, and depicts a scene from the Middle Ages, that of the murder of Louis de Bourbon, Bishop of Liège amidst an orgy sponsored by his captor, William de la Marck. Set in an immense vaulted interior which Delacroix based on sketches of the Palais de Justice in Rouen and Westminster Hall, the drama plays out in chiaroscuro, organized around a brilliantly lit stretch of tablecloth. In 1855, a critic described the painting's vibrant handling as Less finished than a painting, more finished than a sketch, The Murder of the Bishop of Liège was left by the painter at that supreme moment when one more stroke of the brush would have ruined everything.    Liberty Leading the People   Delacroix's most influential work came in 1830 with the painting Liberty Leading the People, which for choice of subject and technique highlights the differences between the romantic approach and the neoclassical style. Less obviously, it also differs from the Romanticism of Géricault, as exemplified by The Raft of the Medusa.  Delacroix felt his composition more vividly as a whole, thought of his figures and crowds as types, and dominated them by the symbolic figure of Republican Liberty which is one of his finest plastic inventions... Probably Delacroix's best-known painting, Liberty Leading the People is an unforgettable image of Parisians, having taken up arms, marching forward under the banner of the tricolour representing liberty, equality, and fraternity. Although Delacroix was inspired by contemporary events to invoke this romantic image of the spirit of liberty, he seems to be trying to convey the will and character of the people, rather than glorifying the actual event, the 1830 revolution against Charles X, which did little other than bring a different king, Louis Philippe I, to power. The warriors lying dead in the foreground offer poignant counterpoint to the symbolic female figure, who is illuminated triumphantly against a background of smoke. Although the French government bought the painting, by 1832 officials deemed its glorification of liberty too inflammatory and removed it from public view. Nonetheless, Delacroix still received many government commissions for murals and ceiling paintings. Following the Revolution of 1848 that saw the end of the reign of King Louis Philippe, Liberty Leading the People was finally put on display by the newly elected president, Louis Napoleon Napoleon III. It is exhibited in the Louvre museum in Paris; although from December 2012 until 2014 it was on exhibit at Louvre-Lens in Lens, Pas-de-Calais. The boy holding a pistol aloft on the right is sometimes thought to be an inspiration for the Gavroche character in Victor Hugo's 1862 novel, Les Misérables.    Religious works   Delacroix painted hundreds of religious works in his lifetime and had a strong interest in Christianity. He had many commissions for religious paintings, including pieces for the Saints-Anges chapel of Saint-Sulpice in Paris. His religious paintings and style would shift drastically depending on the needs of the commission. Some of his religious works, such as Christ on the Sea of Galilee, had multiple painted versions. Delacroix's Pietà, a painting of the Virgin Mary mourning Christ after his death, was eventually redone by Vincent van Gogh. Delacroix reflected on religion through his paintings, and his religious works often show subtle details to Biblical texts. While considered an unbeliever or agnostic, his journal and paintings reveal an openness and receptiveness to spirituality through his art.    Travel to North Africa   In 1832, Delacroix traveled to Spain and North Africa in company with the diplomat Charles-Edgar de Mornay, as part of a diplomatic mission to Morocco shortly after the French conquered Algeria. He went not primarily to study art, but to escape from the civilization of Paris, in hopes of seeing a more primitive culture. He eventually produced over 100 paintings and drawings of scenes from or based on the life of the people of North Africa, and added a new and personal chapter to the interest in Orientalism. Delacroix was entranced by the people and their clothes, and the trip would inform the subject matter of a great many of his future paintings. He believed that the North Africans, in their attire and their attitudes, provided a visual equivalent to the people of Classical Rome and Greece:  The Greeks and Romans are here at my door, in the Arabs who wrap themselves in a white blanket and look like Cato or Brutus...  He managed to sketch some women secretly in Algiers, as in the painting Women of Algiers in their Apartment 1834, but generally he encountered difficulty in finding Muslim women to pose for him because of Muslim rules requiring that women be covered. Less problematic was the painting of Jewish women in North Africa, as subjects for the Jewish Wedding in Morocco 1839. While in Tangier, Delacroix made many sketches of the people and the city, subjects to which he would return until the end of his life. Animals—the embodiment of romantic passion—were incorporated into paintings such as Arab Horses Fighting in a Stable 1860, The Lion Hunt of which there exist many versions, painted between 1856 and 1861, and Arab Saddling his Horse 1855.    Musical inspirations   Delacroix drew inspiration from many sources over his career, such as the literary works of William Shakespeare and Lord Byron, and the artistry of Michelangelo. But, throughout his life, he felt a constant need for music, saying in 1855 that nothing can be compared with the emotion caused by music; that it expresses incomparable shades of feeling. He also said, while working at Saint-Sulpice, that music put him in a state of exaltation that inspired his painting. It was often from music, whether the most melancholy renditions of Chopin or the pastoral works of Beethoven, that Delacroix was able to draw the most emotion and inspiration. At one point during his life, Delacroix befriended and made portraits of the composer Chopin; in his journal, Delacroix praised him frequently.    Murals and later life  In 1838 Delacroix exhibited Medea about to Kill Her Children, which created a sensation at the Salon. His first large-scale treatment of a scene from Greek mythology, the painting depicts Medea clutching her children, dagger drawn to slay them in vengeance for her abandonment by Jason. The three nude figures form an animated pyramid, bathed in a raking light that penetrates the grotto in which Medea has hidden. Though the painting was quickly purchased by the State, Delacroix was disappointed when it was sent to the Lille Musée des Beaux-Arts; he had intended for it to hang at the Luxembourg, where it would have joined The Barque of Dante and Scenes from the Massacres of Chios. From 1833 on Delacroix received numerous commissions to decorate public buildings in Paris. In that year he began work for the Salon du Roi in the Chambre des Députés, Palais Bourbon, which was not completed until 1837, and began a lifelong friendship with the female artist Marie-Élisabeth Blavot-Boulanger. For the next ten years he painted in both the Library at the Palais Bourbon and the Library at the Palais du Luxembourg. In 1843 he decorated the Church of St. Denis du Saint Sacrement with a large Pietà, and from 1848 to 1850 he painted the ceiling in the Galerie d'Apollon of the Louvre. From 1857 to 1861 he worked on frescoes for the Chapelle des Anges at the Church of Saint-Sulpice in Paris. They included Jacob Wrestling with the Angel, Saint Michael Slaying the Dragon, and The Expulsion of Heliodorus from the Temple. These commissions offered him the opportunity to compose on a large scale in an architectural setting, much as had those masters he admired, Paolo Veronese, Tintoretto, and Rubens. The work was fatiguing, and during these years he suffered from an increasingly fragile constitution. In addition to his home in Paris, from 1844 he also lived at a small cottage in Champrosay, where he found respite in the countryside. From 1834 until his death, he was faithfully cared for by his housekeeper, Jeanne-Marie le Guillou, who zealously guarded his privacy, and whose devotion prolonged his life and his ability to continue working in his later years. In 1862 Delacroix participated in the creation of the Société Nationale des Beaux-Arts. His friend, the writer Théophile Gautier, became chairman, with the painter Aimé Millet acting as deputy chairman. In addition to Delacroix, the committee was composed of the painters Carrier-Belleuse and Puvis de Chavannes. Among the exhibitors were Léon Bonnat, Jean-Baptiste Carpeaux, Charles-François Daubigny, Gustave Doré, and Édouard Manet. Just after his death in 1863, the society organized a retrospective exhibition of 248 paintings and lithographs by Delacroix—and ceased to mount any further exhibitions. The winter of 1862–63 was extremely rough for Delacroix; he was suffering from a severe throat infection that worsened over the course of the season. On a trip to Champrosay, he met a friend on the train and became exhausted after their conversation. On 1 June, he returned to Paris to see his doctor. Two weeks later, on 16 June, he was feeling better and returned to his country house. However, by 15 July, he was ill enough to see his doctor again, who said he could do nothing more for him. By then, the only food he could consume was fruit. Delacroix recognized the seriousness of his condition and wrote his will, leaving a gift for each of his friends. For his trusted housekeeper, Jenny Le Guillou, he left enough money for her to live on while instructing everything in his studio to be sold. He also included a clause forbidding any representation of his features, whether by a death-mask or by drawing or by photography. I forbid it, expressly. On 13 August, Delacroix died, with Jenny by his side. He was buried in Père Lachaise Cemetery in Paris. His country house survives at 11, rue Alphonse Daudet, Draveil.    Legacy   At the sale of his work in 1864, 9140 works were attributed to Delacroix, including 853 paintings, 1525 pastels and water colours, 6629 drawings, 109 lithographs, and over 60 sketch books. The number and quality of the drawings, whether done for constructive purposes or to capture a spontaneous movement, underscored his explanation, Colour always occupies me, but drawing preoccupies me. Delacroix produced several fine self-portraits, and a number of memorable portraits which seem to have been done purely for pleasure, among which were the portrait of fellow artist Baron Schwiter, an inspired small oil of the violinist Niccolò Paganini, and Portrait of Frédéric Chopin and George Sand, a double portrait of his friends, the composer Frédéric Chopin and writer George Sand; the painting was cut after his death, but the individual portraits survive. On occasion Delacroix painted pure landscapes The Sea at Dieppe, 1852 and still lifes Still Life with Lobsters, 1826–27, both of which feature the virtuoso execution of his figure-based works. He is also well known for his Journal, in which he gave eloquent expression to his thoughts on art and contemporary life. A generation of impressionists was inspired by Delacroix's work. Renoir and Manet made copies of his paintings, and Degas purchased the portrait of Baron Schwiter for his private collection. His painting at the church of Saint-Sulpice has been called the finest mural painting of his time. Contemporary Chinese artist Yue Minjun has created his own interpretation of Delacroix's painting Massacre of Chios, which retains the same name. Yue Minjun's painting was itself sold at Sotheby's for nearly $4.1 million in 2007. His pencil drawing Moorish Conversation on a Terrace was discovered as part of the Munich Art Hoard.    Selected works     See also   Jean Louis Marie Eugène Durieu, friend and photographer Orientalism Musée national Eugène Delacroix, his last apartment in Paris    Notes     References     External links   Works by or about Eugène Delacroix at the Internet Archive Bibliothèque numérique de l'INHA – Journal et Correspondance d'Eugène Delacroix Archived 16 November 2018 at the Wayback Machine Eugène Delacroix's biography, context, style and technique The National Gallery: Delacroix Brief biography at the Getty Museum Le musée national Eugène Delacroix in French A free video documentary about Delacroix's Liberty Leading the People Harriet Griffiths & Alister Mill, Delacroix's Salon exhibition record, 1827–1849, Database of Salon Artists, 1827–1850 Examination of The Shipwreck of Don Juan. Paintings & Drawings. Victoria and Albert Museum. Archived from the original on 29 September 2007. Eugène Delacroix 1798–1863: Paintings, Drawings, and Prints from North American Collections, a full text exhibition catalog from The Metropolitan Museum of Art Romanticism & The School of Nature : Nineteenth-century drawings and paintings from the Karen B. Cohen collection, a full text exhibition catalog from The Metropolitan Museum of Art see index Jennifer A. Thompson, Basket of Flowers and Fruit by Eugège Delacroix cat. 974 in The John G. Johnson Collection: A History and Selected Works, a Philadelphia Museum of Art free digital publication. Delacroix and the Rise of Modern Art 2016 exhibition at the National Gallery, London. Eugène Delacroix: Drawings, Watercolors, Pastels, and Small Oils 16 October – 20 November 2018 at Jill Newhouse Gallery, Exhibition catalogue Delacroix 2018 exhibition at the Metropolitan Museum of Art. Catalog by Sébastien Allard, Côme Fabre and Mehdi Korchane.  ISBN 978-1-588-39651-8 Delacroix Drawings The Karen B. Cohen Collection 2018 exhibition at the Metropolitan Museum of Art. Catalog by Ashley Dunn ISBN 978-1-588-39680-8"@"Eugène Delacroix"@"romanticism"








"Caspar David Friedrich Caspar David Friedrich German: [ˌkaspaʁ ˌdaːvɪt ˈfʁiːdʁɪç] ; 5 September 1774 – 7 May 1840 was a German Romantic landscape painter, generally considered the most important German artist of his generation, whose often symbolic, and anti-classical work, conveys a subjective, emotional response to the natural world. Friedrich's paintings often set contemplative human figures silhouetted against night skies, morning mists, barren trees or Gothic ruins. Art historian Christopher John Murray described their presence, in diminished perspective, amid expansive landscapes, as reducing the figures to a scale that directs the viewer's gaze towards their metaphysical dimension. Friedrich was born in the town of Greifswald on the Baltic Sea in what was at the time Swedish Pomerania. He studied in Copenhagen 1794–1798, before settling in Dresden. He came of age during a period when, across Europe, a growing disillusionment with materialistic society was giving rise to a new appreciation of spirituality. This shift was often expressed through a reevaluation of the natural world, as artists such as Friedrich, J. M. W. Turner and John Constable sought to depict nature as a divine creation, to be set against the artifice of human civilization. Friedrich's work brought him renown early in his career. Contemporaries such as the French sculptor David d'Angers spoke of him as having discovered the tragedy of landscape. His work nevertheless fell from favour during his later years, and he died in obscurity. As Germany moved towards modernisation in the late 19th century, a new sense of urgency characterised its art, and Friedrich's contemplative depictions of stillness came to be seen as products of a bygone age. The early 20th century brought a renewed appreciation of his art, beginning in 1906 with an exhibition of thirty-two of his paintings in Berlin. His work influenced Expressionist artists and later Surrealists and Existentialists. The rise of Nazism in the early 1930s saw a resurgence in Friedrich's popularity, but this was followed by a sharp decline as his paintings were, by association with the Nazi movement, seen as promoting German nationalism.    Life     Early years and family   Caspar David Friedrich was born on 5 September 1774, in Greifswald, Swedish Pomerania, on the Baltic coast of Germany. The sixth of ten children, he was raised in the strict Lutheran creed of his father Adolf Gottlieb Friedrich, a candle-maker and soap boiler. Records of the family's financial circumstances are contradictory; while some sources indicate the children were privately tutored, others record that they were raised in relative poverty. He became familiar with death from an early age. His mother, Sophie, died in 1781 when he was seven. A year later, his sister Elisabeth died, and a second sister, Maria, succumbed to typhus in 1791. Arguably the greatest tragedy of his childhood happened in 1787 when his brother Johann Christoffer died: at the age of thirteen, Caspar David witnessed his younger brother fall through the ice of a frozen lake and drown. Some accounts suggest that Johann Christoffer perished while trying to rescue Caspar David, who was also in danger on the ice.  Friedrich began his formal study of art in 1790 as a private student of artist Johann Gottfried Quistorp at the University of Greifswald in his home city, at which the art department is now named Caspar-David-Friedrich-Institut in his honour. Quistorp took his students on outdoor drawing excursions; as a result, Friedrich was encouraged to sketch from life at an early age. Through Quistorp, Friedrich met and was subsequently influenced by the theologian Ludwig Gotthard Kosegarten, who taught that nature was a revelation of God. Quistorp introduced Friedrich to the work of the German 17th-century artist Adam Elsheimer, whose works often included religious subjects dominated by landscape, and nocturnal subjects. During this period he also studied literature and aesthetics with Swedish professor Thomas Thorild. Friedrich entered the prestigious Academy of Copenhagen four years later, where he began by making copies of casts from antique sculptures before proceeding to drawing from life.  Living in Copenhagen afforded the young painter access to the Royal Picture Gallery's collection of 17th-century Dutch landscape painting. At the academy, he studied under teachers such as Christian August Lorentzen and the landscape painter Jens Juel. These artists were inspired by the Sturm und Drang movement and represented a midpoint between the dramatic intensity and expressive manner of the budding Romantic aesthetic and the waning neo-classical ideal. Mood was paramount, and influence was drawn from such sources as the Icelandic legend of Edda, the poems of Ossian and Norse mythology.    Move to Dresden  Friedrich settled permanently in Dresden in 1798. During this early period, he experimented in printmaking with etchings and designs for woodcuts which his furniture-maker brother cut. By 1804 he had produced 18 etchings and four woodcuts; they were apparently made in small numbers and only distributed to friends. Despite these forays into other media, he gravitated toward working primarily with ink, watercolour and sepias. With the exception of a few early pieces, such as Landscape with Temple in Ruins 1797, he did not work extensively with oils until his reputation was more established. Landscapes were his preferred subject, inspired by frequent trips, beginning in 1801, to the Baltic coast, Bohemia, the Krkonoše and the Harz Mountains. Mostly based on the landscapes of northern Germany, his paintings depict woods, hills, harbours, morning mists and other light effects based on a close observation of nature. These works were modelled on sketches and studies of scenic spots, such as the cliffs on Rügen, the surroundings of Dresden and the river Elbe. He executed his studies almost exclusively in pencil, even providing topographical information, yet the subtle atmospheric effects characteristic of Friedrich's mid-period paintings were rendered from memory. These effects took their strength from the depiction of light, and of the illumination of sun and moon on clouds and water: optical phenomena peculiar to the Baltic coast that had never before been painted with such an emphasis.  His reputation as an artist was established when he won a prize in 1805 at the Weimar competition organised by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe. At the time, the Weimar competition tended to draw mediocre and now-forgotten artists presenting derivative mixtures of neo-classical and pseudo-Greek styles. The poor quality of the entries began to prove damaging to Goethe's reputation, so when Friedrich entered two sepia drawings—Procession at Dawn and Fisher-Folk by the Sea—the poet responded enthusiastically and wrote, We must praise the artist's resourcefulness in this picture fairly. The drawing is well done, the procession is ingenious and appropriate ... his treatment combines a great deal of firmness, diligence and neatness ... the ingenious watercolour ... is also worthy of praise. Friedrich completed the first of his major paintings in 1808, at the age of 34. Cross in the Mountains, today known as the Tetschen Altar, is an altarpiece panel said to have been commissioned for a family chapel in Tetschen, Bohemia. The panel depicts a cross in profile at the top of a mountain, alone, and surrounded by pine trees. Although the altarpiece was generally coldly received, it was Friedrich's first painting to receive wide publicity. The artist's friends publicly defended the work, while art critic Basilius von Ramdohr published a long article challenging Friedrich's use of landscape in a religious context. He rejected the idea that landscape painting could convey explicit meaning, writing that it would be a veritable presumption, if landscape painting were to sneak into the church and creep onto the altar. Friedrich responded with a programme describing his intentions in 1809, comparing the rays of the evening sun to the light of the Holy Father. This statement marked the only time Friedrich recorded a detailed interpretation of his own work, and the painting was among the few commissions the artist ever received.  Following the purchase of two of his paintings by the Prussian Crown Prince, Friedrich was elected a member of the Berlin Academy in 1810. Yet in 1816, he sought to distance himself from Prussian authority and applied that June for Saxon citizenship. The move was not expected; the Saxon government was pro-French, while Friedrich's paintings were seen as generally patriotic and distinctly anti-French. Nevertheless, with the aid of his Dresden-based friend Graf Vitzthum von Eckstädt, Friedrich attained citizenship, and in 1818, membership in the Saxon Academy with a yearly dividend of 150 thalers. Although he had hoped to receive a full professorship, it was never awarded him as, according to the German Library of Information, it was felt that his painting was too personal, his point of view too individual to serve as a fruitful example to students. Politics may have played a role in stalling his career: Friedrich's decidedly Germanic subjects and costuming frequently clashed with the era's prevailing pro-French attitudes.    Marriage   On 21 January 1818, Friedrich married Caroline Bommer, the twenty-five-year-old daughter of a dyer from Dresden. The couple had three children, with their first, Emma, arriving in 1820. Gustav Adolf, their third child, was named after Swedish King Gustavus Adolphus, and became a notable painter in his own right. The physiologist and painter Carl Gustav Carus notes in his biographical essays that marriage did not impact significantly on either Friedrich's life or personality, yet his canvasses from this period, including Chalk Cliffs on Rügen—painted after his honeymoon—display a new sense of levity, while his palette is brighter and less austere. Human figures appear with increasing frequency in the paintings of this period, which Siegel interprets as a reflection that the importance of human life, particularly his family, now occupies his thoughts more and more, and his friends, his wife, and his townspeople appear as frequent subjects in his art. Around this time, he found support from two sources in Russia. In 1820, the Grand Duke Nikolai Pavlovich, at the behest of his wife Alexandra Feodorovna, visited Friedrich's studio and returned to Saint Petersburg with a number of his paintings, an exchange that began a patronage that continued for many years. Not long thereafter, the poet Vasily Zhukovsky, tutor to the Grand Duke's son later Tsar Alexander II, met Friedrich in 1821 and found in him a kindred spirit. Zhukovsky helped Friedrich for decades, both by purchasing his work himself and by recommending his art to the royal family; his assistance toward the end of Friedrich's career proved invaluable to the ailing and impoverished artist. Zhukovsky remarked that his friend's paintings please us by their precision, each of them awakening a memory in our mind. Friedrich was acquainted with Philipp Otto Runge, another leading German painter of the Romantic period. He was also a friend of Georg Friedrich Kersting, and painted him at work in his unadorned studio, and of the Norwegian painter Johan Christian Clausen Dahl 1788–1857. Dahl was close to Friedrich during the artist's final years and he expressed dismay that to the art-buying public, Friedrich's pictures were only curiosities. While the poet Zhukovsky appreciated Friedrich's psychological themes, Dahl praised the descriptive quality of Friedrich's landscapes, commenting that artists and connoisseurs saw in Friedrich's art only a kind of mystic, because they themselves were only looking out for the mystic ... They did not see Friedrich's faithful and conscientious study of nature in everything he represented.    Later life   Friedrich's reputation steadily declined over the final fifteen years of his life. As the ideals of early Romanticism passed from fashion, he came to be viewed as an eccentric and melancholy character, out of touch with the times. Gradually his patrons fell away. By 1820, he was living as a recluse and was described by friends as the most solitary of the solitary. Towards the end of his life he lived in relative poverty. He became isolated and spent long periods of the day and night walking alone through woods and fields, often beginning his strolls before sunrise. He suffered his first stroke in June 1835, which left him with minor limb paralysis and greatly reduced his ability to paint. As a result, he was unable to work in oil and limited to watercolour, sepia and reworking older compositions. Although his vision remained strong, he had lost the full strength of his hand. Yet he was able to produce a final 'black painting', Seashore by Moonlight 1835–1836, described by Vaughan as the darkest of all his shorelines, in which richness of tonality compensates for the lack of his former finesse. Symbols of death appeared in his work from this period. Soon after his stroke, the Russian royal family purchased a number of his earlier works, and the proceeds allowed him to travel to Teplitz—in today's Czech Republic—to recover. During the mid-1830s, Friedrich began a series of portraits and returned to observing himself in nature. As the art historian William Vaughan observed, however, He can see himself as a man greatly changed. He is no longer the upright, supportive figure that appeared in Two Men Contemplating the Moon in 1819. He is old and stiff ... he moves with a stoop. By 1838, he was capable of working in a small format only. He and his family were living in poverty and grew increasingly dependent for support on the charity of friends.    Death   Friedrich died in Dresden on 7 May 1840 and was buried in Dresden's Trinitatis-Friedhof Trinity Cemetery east of the city centre the entrance to which he had painted with his 'Cemetery Entrance in 1825. His wife Caroline died in poverty in 1847. By this time his reputation and fame had waned, and his death was little noticed within the artistic community. His artwork had certainly been acknowledged during his lifetime, but not widely. While the close study of landscape and an emphasis on the spiritual elements of nature were commonplace in contemporary art, his interpretations were highly original and personal. Carl Gustav Carus later wrote a series of articles which paid tribute to Friedrich's transformation of the conventions of landscape painting.  However, Carus' articles placed Friedrich firmly in his time and did not place the artist within a continuing tradition. Only one of his paintings had been reproduced as a print, and that was produced in very few copies.    Themes     Landscape and the sublime   The visualisation and portrayal of landscape in an entirely new manner was Friedrich's key innovation. He sought not just to explore the enjoyment of a beautiful view as in the classic conception, but rather to examine an instant of sublimity through the contemplation of nature. Friedrich was instrumental in transforming landscape in art from a backdrop subordinated to human drama to a self-contained emotive subject. His paintings often employed the Rückenfigur—a person seen from behind, contemplating the view. The vantage point encourages the viewer to identify with the Rückenfigur, and share with the artist the sublime appreciation of nature.  Friedrich created the idea of a landscape full of romantic feeling—die romantische Stimmungslandschaft. His art details a wide range of geographical features, such as rock coasts, forests and mountain scenes, and often used landscape to express religious themes. During his time, most of the best-known paintings were viewed as expressions of a religious mysticism. He wrote: The artist should paint not only what he sees before him, but also what he sees within him. If, however, he sees nothing within him, then he should also refrain from painting that which he sees before him. Otherwise, his pictures will be like those folding screens behind which one expects to find only the sick or the dead. Expansive skies, storms, mist, forests, ruins and crosses bearing witness to the presence of God are frequent elements in Friedrich's landscapes. Though death finds symbolic expression in boats moving away from a shore, it is referenced more directly in paintings like The Abbey in the Oakwood 1808–1810, in which monks carry a coffin past an open grave, toward a cross, and through the portal of a church in ruins. He was one of the first artists to portray winter landscapes in which the land is rendered as stark and dead. Friedrich's winter scenes are solemn and still—according to the art historian Hermann Beenken, Friedrich painted winter scenes in which no man has yet set his foot. The theme of nearly all the older winter pictures had been less winter itself than life in winter. In the 16th and 17th centuries, it was thought impossible to leave out such motifs as the crowd of skaters, the wanderer ... It was Friedrich who first felt the wholly detached and distinctive features of a natural life. Instead of many tones, he sought the one; and so, in his landscape, he subordinated the composite chord into one single basic note.  Bare oak trees and tree stumps, such as those in Raven Tree c. 1822, Man and Woman Contemplating the Moon c. 1824, and Willow Bush under a Setting Sun c. 1835, are recurring elements of his paintings, and usually symbolise death. Countering the sense of despair are Friedrich's symbols for redemption: the cross and the clearing sky promise eternal life, and the slender moon suggests hope and the growing closeness of Christ. In his paintings of the sea, anchors often appear on the shore, also indicating a spiritual hope. In The Abbey in the Oakwood, the movement of the monks away from the open grave and toward the cross and the horizon imparts Friedrich's message that the final destination of man's life lies beyond the grave.  With dawn and dusk constituting prominent themes of his landscapes, Friedrich's own later years were characterised by a growing pessimism. His work becomes darker, revealing a fearsome monumentality. The Wreck of the Hope—also known as The Polar Sea or The Sea of Ice 1823–1824—perhaps best summarises Friedrich's ideas and aims at this point, though in such a radical way that the painting was not well received. Completed in 1824, it depicted a grim subject, a shipwreck in the Arctic Ocean; the image he produced, with its grinding slabs of travertine-colored floe ice chewing up a wooden ship, goes beyond documentary into allegory: the frail bark of human aspiration crushed by the world's immense and glacial indifference. Friedrich's written commentary on aesthetics was limited to a collection of aphorisms set down in 1830, in which he explained the need for the artist to match natural observation with an introspective scrutiny of his own personality. His best-known remark advises the artist to close your bodily eye so that you may see your picture first with the spiritual eye. Then bring to the light of day that which you have seen in the darkness so that it may react upon others from the outside inwards.    Loneliness and death   Both Friedrich's life and art have at times been perceived as marked by an overwhelming sense of loneliness. Art historians and some of his contemporaries attribute such interpretations to the losses suffered during his youth to the bleak outlook of his adulthood, while Friedrich's pale and withdrawn appearance helped reinforce the popular notion of the taciturn man from the North. Friedrich suffered depressive episodes in 1799, 1803–1805, c. 1813, in 1816 and between 1824 and 1826. There are noticeable thematic shifts in the works he produced during these episodes, which see the emergence of such motifs and symbols as vultures, owls, graveyards and ruins. From 1826, these motifs became a permanent feature of his output, while his use of colour became darker and muted. Carus wrote in 1829 that Friedrich is surrounded by a thick, gloomy cloud of spiritual uncertainty, though the noted art historian and curator Hubertus Gassner disagrees with such notions, seeing in Friedrich's work a positive and life-affirming subtext inspired by Freemasonry and religion.    Germanic folklore  Reflecting Friedrich's patriotism and resentment of the 1813 French occupation of Pomerania, motifs from German folklore became increasingly prominent in his work. An anti-French German nationalist, Friedrich used motifs from his native landscape to celebrate Germanic culture, customs and mythology. He was impressed by the anti-Napoleonic poetry of Ernst Moritz Arndt and Theodor Körner, and the patriotic literature of Adam Müller and Heinrich von Kleist. Moved by the deaths of three friends killed in battle against France, as well as by Kleist's 1808 drama Die Hermannsschlacht, Friedrich undertook a number of paintings in which he intended to convey political symbols solely by means of the landscape—a first in the history of art. In Old Heroes' Graves 1812, a dilapidated monument inscribed Arminius invokes the Germanic chieftain, a symbol of nationalism, while the four tombs of fallen heroes are slightly ajar, freeing their spirits for eternity. Two French soldiers appear as small figures before a cave, lower and deep in a grotto surrounded by rock, as if farther from heaven. A second political painting, Fir Forest with the French Dragoon and the Raven c. 1813, depicts a lost French soldier dwarfed by a dense forest, while on a tree stump a raven is perched—a prophet of doom, symbolizing the anticipated defeat of France.    Legacy     Influence  Alongside other Romantic painters, Friedrich helped position landscape painting as a major genre within Western art. Of his contemporaries, Friedrich's style most influenced the painting of Johan Christian Dahl 1788–1857. Among later generations, Arnold Böcklin 1827–1901 was strongly influenced by his work, and the substantial presence of Friedrich's works in Russian collections influenced many Russian painters, in particular Arkhip Kuindzhi c. 1842–1910 and Ivan Shishkin 1832–1898.  Friedrich's spirituality anticipated American painters such as Albert Pinkham Ryder 1847–1917, Ralph Blakelock 1847–1919, the painters of the Hudson River School and the New England Luminists.  At the turn of the 20th century, Friedrich was rediscovered by the Norwegian art historian Andreas Aubert 1851–1913, whose writing initiated modern Friedrich scholarship, and by the Symbolist painters, who valued his visionary and allegorical landscapes. The Norwegian Symbolist Edvard Munch 1863–1944 would have seen Friedrich's work during a visit to Berlin in the 1880s. Munch's 1899 print The Lonely Ones echoes Friedrich's Rückenfigur back figure, although in Munch's work the focus has shifted away from the broad landscape and toward the sense of dislocation between the two melancholy figures in the foreground. Friedrich's modern revival gained momentum in 1906, when thirty-two of his works were featured in an exhibition in Berlin of Romantic-era art. His landscapes exercised a strong influence on the work of German artist Max Ernst 1891–1976, and as a result other Surrealists came to view Friedrich as a precursor to their movement. In 1934, the Belgian painter René Magritte 1898–1967 paid tribute in his work The Human Condition, which directly echoes motifs from Friedrich's art in its questioning of perception and the role of the viewer. A few years later, the Surrealist journal Minotaure included Friedrich in a 1939 article by the critic Marie Landsberger, thereby exposing his work to a far wider circle of artists. The influence of The Wreck of Hope or The Sea of Ice is evident in the 1940–41 painting Totes Meer by Paul Nash 1889–1946, a fervent admirer of Ernst. Friedrich's work has been cited as an inspiration by other major 20th-century artists, including Mark Rothko 1903–1970, Gerhard Richter b. 1932, Gotthard Graubner and Anselm Kiefer b. 1945. Friedrich's Romantic paintings have also been singled out by writer Samuel Beckett 1906–89, who, standing before Man and Woman Contemplating the Moon, said This was the source of Waiting for Godot, you know.  In his 1961 article The Abstract Sublime, originally published in ARTnews, the art historian Robert Rosenblum drew comparisons between the Romantic landscape paintings of both Friedrich and Turner with the Abstract Expressionist paintings of Mark Rothko. Rosenblum specifically describes Friedrich's 1809 painting The Monk by the Sea, Turner's The Evening Star and Rothko's 1954 Light, Earth and Blue as revealing affinities of vision and feeling. According to Rosenblum, Rothko, like Friedrich and Turner, places us on the threshold of those shapeless infinities discussed by the aestheticians of the Sublime. The tiny monk in the Friedrich and the fisher in the Turner establish a poignant contrast between the infinite vastness of a pantheistic God and the infinite smallness of His creatures. In the abstract language of Rothko, such literal detail—a bridge of empathy between the real spectator and the presentation of a transcendental landscape—is no longer necessary; we ourselves are the monk before the sea, standing silently and contemplatively before these huge and soundless pictures as if we were looking at a sunset or a moonlit night.    Critical appraisal  Until 1890, and especially after his friends had died, Friedrich's work lay in near-oblivion for decades. Yet, by 1890, the symbolism in his work began to ring true with the artistic mood of the day, especially in central Europe. However, despite a renewed interest and an acknowledgment of his originality, his lack of regard for painterly effect and thinly rendered surfaces jarred with the theories of the time. Friedrich's work was used to promote the Nazi ideology in the 1930s, when attempts were made to align Romantic artist and musicians within the nationalistic Blut und Boden ethos. It took decades for Friedrich's reputation to recover from this association with Nazism. His reliance on symbolism and the fact that his work fell outside the narrow definitions of modernism contributed to his fall from favour. In 1949, art historian Kenneth Clark wrote that Friedrich worked in the frigid technique of his time, which could hardly inspire a school of modern painting, and suggested that the artist was trying to express in painting what is best left to poetry. Clark's dismissal of Friedrich reflected the damage the artist's reputation sustained during the late 1930s. Friedrich's reputation suffered further damage when his imagery was adopted by a number of Hollywood directors, including Walt Disney, built on the work of such German cinema masters as Fritz Lang and F. W. Murnau, within the horror and fantasy genres. His rehabilitation was slow, but enhanced through the writings of such critics and scholars as Werner Hofmann, Helmut Börsch-Supan and Sigrid Hinz, who successfully rebutted the political associations ascribed to his work, developed a catalogue raisonné, and placed Friedrich within a purely art-historical context. By the 1970s, he was again being exhibited in major international galleries and found favour with a new generation of critics and art historians. Today, his international reputation is well established. He is a national icon in his native Germany, and highly regarded by art historians and connoisseurs across the Western World. He is generally viewed as a figure of great psychological complexity, and according to Vaughan, a believer who struggled with doubt, a celebrator of beauty haunted by darkness. In the end, he transcends interpretation, reaching across cultures through the compelling appeal of his imagery. He has truly emerged as a butterfly—hopefully one that will never again disappear from our sight.    Work   Friedrich was a prolific artist who produced more than 500 attributed works. In line with the Romantic ideals of his time, he intended his paintings to function as pure aesthetic statements, so he was cautious that the titles given to his work were not overly descriptive or evocative. It is likely that some of today's more literal titles, such as The Stages of Life, were not given by the artist himself, but were instead adopted during one of the revivals of interest in Friedrich. Complications arise when dating Friedrich's work, in part because he often did not directly name or date his canvases. He kept a carefully detailed notebook on his output, however, which has been used by scholars to tie paintings to their completion dates.    Notes     References     Sources     Further reading  Lives of Caspar David Friedrich 2025. London: Pallas Athene. ISBN 978 1 84368 254 7. Introduction by professor of art history Johannes Graves. Contains brief chapters by Caspar David Friedrich; Carl Gustav Carus; Johann Wolfgang von Goethe and Heinrich Meyer; Heinrich von Kleist, Achim von Arnim and Clemens von Brentano; Gotthilf Heinrich von Schubert; and Vasily Andreyevich Zhukowski.    External links   CasparDavidFriedrich.org – 89 paintings by Caspar David Friedrich Biographical timeline, Hamburg Kunsthalle Caspar David Friedrich and the German romantic landscape German masters of the nineteenth century: paintings and drawings from the Federal Republic of Germany 1981, full text exhibition catalog from The Metropolitan Museum of Art, which contains material on Caspar David Friedrich no. 29–36 Caspar David Friedrich: Moonwatchers exhibition at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, September 11–November 11, 2001 Caspar David Friedrich: The Soul of Nature Exhibition at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, February 8–May 11, 2025. Press release The New York Times review  and 40+ minute lecture by Met curators"@"Caspar David Friedrich"@"romanticism"








"J. M. W. Turner Joseph Mallord William Turner  23 April 1775 – 19 December 1851, known in his time as William Turner, was an English Romantic painter, printmaker and watercolourist. He is known for his expressive colouring, imaginative landscapes and turbulent, often violent marine paintings. His artistic style developed over his lifetime, moving away from Romanticism—bypassing the following rising style of Realism—and, instead, with his later works being a significant precursor of and presaging the later Impressionist and Abstract Art movements that arose in the decades after his death. He left behind more than 550 oil paintings, 2,000 watercolours, and 30,000 works on paper. He was championed by the leading English art critic John Ruskin from 1840, and is today regarded as having elevated landscape painting to an eminence rivalling history painting. In 1969 art historian Kenneth Clark wrote of Turner: He was a genius of the first order—far the greatest painter that England has ever produced... Turner was born in Maiden Lane, Covent Garden, London, to a modest lower-middle-class family and retained his lower-class accent, while assiduously avoiding the trappings of success and fame. A child prodigy, Turner studied at the Royal Academy of Arts from 1789, enrolling when he was 14, and exhibited his first work there at 15. During this period, he also served as an architectural draftsman. He earned a steady income from commissions and sales, which he often only begrudgingly accepted owing to his troubled and contrary nature. He opened his own gallery in 1804 and became professor of perspective at the academy in 1807, where he lectured until 1828. He travelled around Europe from 1802, typically returning with voluminous sketchbooks. Intensely private, eccentric, and reclusive, Turner was a controversial figure throughout his career. He did not marry, but fathered two daughters, Evelina 1801–1874 and Georgiana 1811–1843, by the widow Sarah Danby. He became more pessimistic and morose as he got older, especially after the death of his father in 1829; when his outlook deteriorated, his gallery fell into disrepair and neglect, and his art intensified. In 1841, Turner rowed a boat into the Thames so he could not be counted as present at any property in that year's census. He lived in squalor and poor health from 1845, and died in London in 1851 aged 76. Turner is buried in St Paul's Cathedral, London.    Biography     Childhood   Turner's father William Turner 1745–1829 moved to London around 1770 from South Molton, Devon. Joseph Mallord William Turner was born on 23 April 1775 and baptised on 14 May. He was born in Maiden Lane, Covent Garden, in London. His father  was a barber and wig maker. His mother, Mary Marshall, came from a family of butchers. A younger sister, Mary Ann, was born in September 1778 but died in August 1783. There are reasons to question the accepted location and birth date for Turner: He sometimes talked of being born in the same year as Napolean and the Duke of Wellington This would put Turner's birth date as 1769.  His age at death in the General Register Office death index is 81 which may support his being born in 1769.  However, in the first codicil to his will dated 20 August 1832, he states that his birthday was 23 April. As the birth place of Turner has recently appeared to some persons a matter of doubt, I may here observe that he was born at Barnstaple, and neither in Maiden-lane nor at South Molton, if his own words go for anything. Cyrus Redding, Fraser's Magazine, February 1852. Turner's mother showed signs of mental disturbance from 1785 and was admitted to St Luke's Hospital for Lunatics in Old Street in 1799. She was moved in 1800 to Bethlem Hospital, a mental asylum, where she died in 1804. Turner was sent to his maternal uncle, Joseph Mallord William Marshall, a butcher in Brentford, then a small town on the banks of the River Thames west of London, where Turner attended school. The earliest known artistic exercise by Turner is from this period—a series of simple colourings of engraved plates from Henry Boswell's Picturesque View of the Antiquities of England and Wales. Around 1786, Turner was sent to Margate on the north-east Kent coast. There, he produced a series of drawings of the town and surrounding area that foreshadowed his later work. By this time, Turner's drawings were being exhibited in his father's shop window and sold for a few shillings. His father boasted to the artist Thomas Stothard that: My son, sir, is going to be a painter. In 1789, Turner again stayed with his uncle who had retired to Sunningwell then in Berkshire, now part of Oxfordshire. A whole sketchbook of work from this time survives, as well as a watercolour of Oxford. The use of pencil sketches on location, as the foundation for later finished paintings, formed the basis of Turner's essential working style for his whole career. Many early sketches by Turner were architectural studies or exercises in perspective, and it is known that, as a young man, he worked for several architects, including Thomas Hardwick, James Wyatt and Joseph Bonomi the Elder. By the end of 1789, he had also begun to study under the topographical draughtsman Thomas Malton, who specialised in London views. Turner learned from him the basic tricks of the trade, copying and colouring outline prints of British castles and abbeys. He would later call Malton My real master. Topography was a thriving industry by which a young artist could pay for his studies.    Career   Turner entered the Royal Academy of Art in 1789, aged 14, and was accepted into the academy a year later by Sir Joshua Reynolds. He showed an early interest in architecture but was advised by Hardwick to focus on painting. His first watercolour, A View of the Archbishop's Palace, Lambeth, was accepted for the Royal Academy summer exhibition of 1790 when Turner was 15. As an academy probationer, Turner was taught drawing from plaster casts of antique sculptures. From July 1790 to October 1793, his name appears in the registry of the academy over a hundred times. In June 1792, he was admitted to the life class to learn to draw the human body from naked models. Turner exhibited watercolours each year at the academy while painting in the winter and travelling in the summer widely throughout Britain, particularly to Wales, where he produced a wide range of sketches for working up into studies and watercolours. These were particularly focused on architectural work, which used his skills as a draughtsman. In 1793, he showed the oil titled The Rising Squall, Hot Wells lost until 2024, which foreshadowed his later climatical effects. The British writer Peter Cunningham, in his obituary of Turner, wrote that it was: recognised by the wiser few as a noble attempt at lifting landscape art out of the tame insipidities ... [and] evinced for the first time that mastery of effect for which he is now justly celebrated.  In 1796, Turner exhibited Fishermen at Sea, a nocturnal moonlit scene of the Needles off the Isle of Wight, an image of boats in peril. Wilton said that the image was a summary of all that had been said about the sea by the artists of the 18th century and shows strong influence by artists such as Claude Joseph Vernet, Philip James de Loutherbourg, Peter Monamy and Francis Swaine, who was admired for his moonlight marine paintings. The image was praised by contemporary critics and founded Turner's reputation as both an oil painter and a painter of maritime scenes.  Turner travelled widely in Europe, starting with France and Switzerland in 1802 and studying in the Louvre in Paris in the same year. He made many visits to Venice. Important support for his work came from Walter Ramsden Fawkes of Farnley Hall, near Otley in Yorkshire, who became a close friend of the artist. Turner first visited Otley in 1797, aged 22, when commissioned to paint watercolours of the area. He was so attracted to Otley and the surrounding area that he returned to it throughout his career. The stormy backdrop of Snow Storm: Hannibal and his Army Crossing the Alps is reputed to have been inspired by a storm over the Chevin in Otley while he was staying at Farnley Hall. Turner was a frequent guest of George Wyndham, 3rd Earl of Egremont, at Petworth House in West Sussex, and painted scenes that Egremont funded, taken from the grounds of the house and of the Sussex countryside, including a view of the Chichester Canal. Petworth House still displays 20 paintings, the largest collection of his work outside the Tate.    Later life  As Turner grew older, he became more eccentric. He had few close friends except for his father, who lived with him for 30 years and worked as his studio assistant. His father's death in 1829 had a profound effect on him, and thereafter, he was subject to bouts of depression. He never married but had a relationship with an older widow, his housekeeper, Sarah Danby. He is believed to have been the father of her two daughters Evelina Dupuis and Georgiana Thompson. Evelina married Joseph Dupuis on 31 October 1817. It was recorded that her mother, Sarah Danby, was a witness along with Charles Thompson.  Turner formed a relationship with Sophia Caroline Booth  after her second husband died, and from 1846 he lived with her as Mr Booth or Admiral Booth in her house at 6 Davis's Place now Cheyne Walk in Chelsea, until his death in December 1851. Turner was a habitual user of snuff; in 1838, Louis Philippe I, King of the French, presented a gold snuff box to him. Of two other snuffboxes, an agate and silver example bears Turner's name, and another, made of wood, was collected along with his spectacles, magnifying glass and card case by an associate housekeeper. Turner formed a short but intense friendship with the artist Edward Thomas Daniell. The painter David Roberts wrote of him that, He adored Turner, when I and others doubted, and taught me to see & to distinguish his beauties over that of others ... the old man really had a fond & personal regard for this young clergyman, which I doubt he ever evinced for the other. Daniell may have supplied Turner with the spiritual comfort he needed after the deaths of his father and friends, and to ease the fears of a naturally reflective man approaching old age. After Daniell's death in Lycia at the age of 38, he told Roberts he would never form such a friendship again.  Before leaving for the Middle East, Daniell commissioned Turner’s portrait from John Linnell. Turner had previously refused to sit for the artist, and it was difficult to get his agreement to be portrayed. Daniell positioned the two men opposite each other at dinner, so that Linnell could observe his subject carefully and portray his likeness from memory.His death certificate shows that he died of natural decay at the age of 81.  His place of death was recorded as Davis Place, Cremorne Road which was the residence of Sophia Booth, the woman believed to be his common law wife. He is buried in St Paul's Cathedral, where he lies near the painter Sir Joshua Reynolds. Apparently his last words were The Sun or Son is God, though this may be apocryphal. Turner's friend, the architect Philip Hardwick, the son of his old tutor, was in charge of making the funeral arrangements and wrote to those who knew Turner to tell them at the time of his death that, I must inform you, we have lost him. Other executors were his cousin and chief mourner at the funeral, Henry Harpur IV benefactor of Westminster – now Chelsea & Westminster – Hospital, Revd. Henry Scott Trimmer, George Jones RA and Charles Turner ARA.    Art     Style  Turner's talent was recognised early in his life. Financial independence allowed Turner to innovate freely; his mature work is characterised by a chromatic palette and broadly applied atmospheric washes of paint. According to David Piper's The Illustrated History of Art, his later pictures were called fantastic puzzles. Turner was recognised as an artistic genius; the English art critic John Ruskin described him as the artist who could most stirringly and truthfully measure the moods of Nature.  Turner's imagination was sparked by shipwrecks, fires including the burning of Parliament in 1834, an event which Turner witnessed first-hand, and transcribed in a series of watercolour sketches, and natural phenomena such as sunlight, storm, rain, and fog. He was fascinated by the violent power of the sea, as seen at the 1840 Royal Academy of Arts exhibition, where The Slave Ship 1840, and Rockets and Blue Lights Close at Hand to Warn Steamboats of Shoal Water 1840 were first shown. A 2003 exhibition at the Clark Art Institute suggested these two paintings were pendants, due in part to their similar content and size. Turner's work drew criticism from contemporaries. An anonymous reviewer of the 1840 Royal Academy exhibition, later identified as John Eagles, called the displayed paintings absurd extravagances [that] disgrace the Exhibition. Sir George Beaumont, a landscape painter and fellow member of the Royal Academy, described his paintings as blots. Turner's major venture into printmaking was the Liber Studiorum Book of Studies, seventy prints that he worked on from 1806 to 1819. The Liber Studiorum was an expression of his intentions for landscape art. The idea was loosely based on Claude Lorrain's Liber Veritatis Book of Truth, where Claude had recorded his completed paintings; a series of print copies of these drawings, by then at Devonshire House, had been a huge publishing success.  Turner's plates were meant to be widely disseminated, and categorised the genre into six types: Marine, Mountainous, Pastoral, Historical, Architectural, and Elevated or Epic Pastoral. His printmaking was a major part of his output, and a museum is devoted to it, the Turner Museum in Sarasota, Florida, founded in 1974 by Douglass Montrose-Graem to house his collection of Turner prints. His early works, such as Tintern Abbey 1795, stay true to the traditions of English landscape. In Hannibal Crossing the Alps 1812, an emphasis on the destructive power of nature has already come into play. His distinctive style of painting, in which he used watercolour technique with oil paints, created lightness, fluency, and ephemeral atmospheric effects. In Turner's later years, he used oils ever more transparently and turned to an evocation of almost pure light by use of shimmering colour. A prime example of his mature style can be seen in Rain, Steam and Speed – The Great Western Railway, where the objects are barely recognisable. The intensity of hue and interest in evanescent light not only placed Turner's work in the vanguard of English painting but exerted an influence on art in France; the Impressionists, particularly Claude Monet, carefully studied his techniques. He is also generally regarded as a precursor of abstract painting. High levels of volcanic ash in the atmosphere from the eruption of Mount Tambora during 1816, the Year Without a Summer, led to unusually spectacular sunsets during this period, and were an inspiration for some of Turner's work. John Ruskin said that an early patron, Thomas Monro, Principal Physician of Bedlam, and a collector and amateur artist, was a significant influence on Turner's style:  His true master was Dr Monro; to the practical teaching of that first patron and the wise simplicity of method of watercolour study, in which he was disciplined by him and companioned by his friend Girtin, the healthy and constant development of the greater power is primarily to be attributed; the greatness of the power itself, it is impossible to over-estimate. Together with some young artists, Turner was able, in Monro's London house, to copy works of the major topographical draughtsmen of his time and perfect his skills in drawing. But the curious atmospheric effects and illusions of John Robert Cozens's watercolours, some of which were present in Monro's house, went far further than the neat renderings of topography. The solemn grandeur of his Alpine views was an early revelation to the young Turner and showed him the true potential of the watercolour medium, conveying mood instead of information.    Materials  Turner experimented with a wide variety of pigments. He used formulations like carmine, despite knowing that they were not long-lasting, and against the advice of contemporary experts to use more durable pigments. As a result, many of his colours have now faded. Ruskin complained at how quickly his work decayed; Turner was indifferent to posterity and chose materials that looked good when freshly applied. By 1930, there was concern that both his oils and his watercolours were fading.    Gallery     Legacy  Turner left a small fortune, which he hoped would be used to support what he called decayed artists. He planned an almshouse at Twickenham in west London with a gallery for some of his works. His will was contested, and in 1856, after a court battle, his first cousins, including Thomas Price Turner, received part of his fortune. Another portion went to the Royal Academy of Arts, which occasionally awards students the Turner Medal. His finished paintings were bequeathed to the British nation, and he intended that a special gallery would be built to house them. This did not happen because there was disagreement over the final site. Twenty-two years after his death, the British Parliament passed an act allowing his paintings to be lent to museums outside London, beginning a process of dispersing the pictures that Turner had wished to be kept together. One of the greatest collectors of his work was Henry Vaughan, who, when he died in 1899, owned more than one hundred watercolours and drawings by Turner and as many prints. His collection included examples of almost every type of work on paper the artist produced, from early topographical drawings and atmospheric landscape watercolours, to brilliant colour studies, literary vignette illustrations and spectacular exhibition pieces. It included nearly a hundred proofs of Liber Studiorum and twenty-three drawings connected with it. It was an unparalleled collection that comprehensively represented the diversity, imagination and technical inventiveness of Turner's work throughout his sixty-year career. Vaughan bequeathed most of his Turner collection to British and Irish public galleries and museums, stipulating that the collections of Turner's watercolours should be 'exhibited to the public all at one time, free of charge and only in January', demonstrating an awareness of conservation which was unusual at the time. In 1910, the main part of the Turner Bequest, which includes unfinished paintings and drawings, was rehoused in the Duveen Turner Wing at the National Gallery of British Art now Tate Britain. In 1987, a new wing at the Tate, the Clore Gallery, was opened to house the Turner bequest although some of the most important paintings remain in the National Gallery in contravention of Turner's condition that they be kept and shown together. Increasingly, paintings are lent abroad, ignoring Turner's provision that they remain constantly and permanently in Turner's Gallery. St. Mary's Church, Battersea, added a commemorative stained glass window for Turner, between 1976 and 1982. St Paul's Cathedral, Royal Academy of Arts and the Victoria & Albert Museum all hold statues representing him. A portrait by Cornelius Varley with his patent graphic telescope Sheffield Museums & Galleries was compared with his death mask National Portrait Gallery, London by Kelly Freeman at Dundee University 2009–10 to ascertain whether it really depicts Turner. The City of Westminster unveiled a memorial plaque at the site of his birthplace at 21 Maiden Lane, Covent Garden, on 2 June 1999. Selby Whittingham founded The Turner Society at London and Manchester in 1975. After the society endorsed the Tate Gallery's Clore Gallery wing on the lines of the Duveen wing of 1910, as the solution to the controversy of what should be done with the Turner Bequest, Selby Whittingham resigned and founded the Independent Turner Society. The Tate created the prestigious annual Turner Prize art award in 1984, named in Turner's honour, and 20 years later, the Royal Institute of Painters in Water Colours founded the Winsor & Newton Turner Watercolour Award. A major exhibition, Turner's Britain, with material including The Fighting Temeraire on loan from around the globe, was held at Birmingham Museum and Art Gallery from 7 November 2003 to 8 February 2004. In 2005, Turner's The Fighting Temeraire was voted Britain's greatest painting in a public poll organised by the BBC.    Portrayal  Leo McKern played Turner in The Sun Is God, a 1974 Thames Television production directed by Michael Darlow. The programme aired on 17 December 1974, during the Turner Bicentenary Exhibition in London. British filmmaker Mike Leigh wrote and directed Mr. Turner, a biopic of Turner's later years, released in 2014. The film stars Timothy Spall as Turner, Dorothy Atkinson, Marion Bailey and Paul Jesson, and premiered in competition for the Palme d'Or at the 2014 Cannes Film Festival, with Spall taking the award for Best Actor. The Bank of England announced that a portrait of Turner, with a backdrop of The Fighting Temeraire, would appear on the £20 note beginning in 2020. It is the first £20 British banknote printed on polymer. The Turner £20 note entered circulation on Thursday, 20 February 2020.    See also  List of paintings by J. M. W. Turner    Explanatory notes     Citations     General and cited sources  Bailey, Anthony 1998. Standing in the Sun: A Life of J. M. W. Turner. London: Pimlico. ISBN 0-7126-6604-4. Finberg, A. J. 1961 [1939]. The Life of J. M. W. Turner, R.A. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Hamilton, James 2007. Turner. New York: Random House. ISBN 978-0-8129-6791-3. Harrison, Colin 2000. Turner's Oxford. Oxford: Ashmolean Museum. Hill, David 2008. Turner and Leeds: Image of Industry. Jeremy Mills Publishing. Moyle, Franny 2016. Turner: The Extraordinary Life and Momentous Times of J.M.W. Turner. PenguinRandom House. ISBN 978-0-241-96456-9. Warburton, Stanley 2008. Discovering Turner's Lakeland. Lytham St Annes: Stanley Warburton. Warrell, Ian 2007. J. M. W. Turner.  London: Tate Publishing.  ISBN 978-1-854-37569-8 Whittingham, Selby 1993–1996. An Historical Account of the Will of J. M. W. Turner, R.A. London: J. M. W. Turner, R.A., Publications. Wilton, Andrew 2006. Turner in His Time revised ed.. London: Thames & Hudson. ISBN 978-0-500-23830-1.    Further reading  Ackroyd, Peter 2005. J. M. W. Turner. Ackroyd's Brief Lives. New York: Nan A. Talese. ISBN 0-385-50798-4. Barker, Elizabeth E October 2004. Joseph Mallord William Turner 1775–1851. Heilbrunn Timeline of Art History. The Metropolitan Museum of Art. Bockemühl, Michael 2015 [1991]. J. M. W. Turner, 1775–1851: The World of Light and Colour. Köln: Taschen. ISBN 978-3-8228-6325-1. Hamilton, James 1998. Turner and the Scientists. London: Tate Publishing. ISBN 978-1-85437-255-0. Joll, Evelyn; Butlin, Martin; Herrmann, Luke, eds. 2001. The Oxford Companion to J. M. W. Turner. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press. ISBN 0-19-860025-9. Lindsay, Jack 1966. Turner : His Life and Work. Greenwich, Connecticut: New York Graphic Society. Retrieved 27 March 2025. Mr. Lindsay’s very readable biography does make of him for the first time a credible human being. Singh, Iona 2012. J.M.W. Turner as Producer. Color, Facture, Art & Design. Winchester, UK; Washington, DC: Zero Books. pp. 129–152. ISBN 978-1-78099-629-5. Townsend, Joyce 1993. Turner's Painting Techniques. London: Tate Publishing. ISBN 978-1-85437-202-4. Retrieved 27 March 2025. Catalogue of a 1993 exhibit at the Tate Gallery now Tate Britain. Venning, Barry 2003. Turner. Berlin: Phaidon Verlag GmbH. ISBN 0-7148-3988-4. Wallace, Robert K. 1992. Melville & Turner: Spheres of Love and Fright. The University of Georgia Press. ISBN 0-8203-1366-1. Wallace explores the stylistic and aesthetic affinities of English landscape painter J. M. W. Turner 1775-1851 and American novelist Herman Melville, establishing Turner as a decisive influence on the creation of Melville's Moby-Dick. Quotation from dust jacket Williams, Roger 2018. A Year of Turner and the Thames. London: Bristol Book Publishing. ISBN 978-0-9928466-9-5. Wilton, Andrew 1982. J. M. W. Turner: France, Italy, Germany, Switzerland. New York: George Braziller. ISBN 978-0807610466.    External links   Turner, Joseph Mallord William . Encyclopedia Americana. 1920. 400 artworks by or after J. M. W. Turner at the Art UK site The Turner Society Turner & the 1834 Parliament Fire – UK Parliament Living Heritage J.M.W. Turner exhibition catalogs Web site of the Tate Turner Collection, includes the Turner Bequest of over 300 Oil paintings and over 30,000 sketches. The catalogue holds records of over 40,000 works by Turner Works by J. M. W. Turner at Project Gutenberg Works by or about J. M. W. Turner at the Internet Archive A Brief History of Abstract Art with Turner, Mondrian and More Turner's Whaling Pictures, The Metropolitan Museum of Art Bulletin, v. 73, no. 4 Spring, 2016; Turner’s Whaling Pictures exhibition Johnson, Ken 3 June 2016. In Turner Paintings at the Met, the Bloody Business of Whaling. The New York Times. pp. C23. ProQuest 2310050465.  Rocks at Colgong on the Ganges., engraved by Edward Goodall for Fisher's Drawing Room Scrap Book, 1839, with a poetical illustration by Letitia Elizabeth Landon. Splendid Lies review by John Updike of J.M.W. Turner: an exhibition at the National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C., October 1, 2007 – January 6, 2008; the Dallas Museum of Art, February 10 – May 18, 2008; and the Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, July  1 – September 21, 2008. Turner's poems and other texts Bibliotheca Augustana Turner’s Modern and Ancient Ports: Passages through Time 2017 exhibition at the Frick Collection Turner 250, a year-long festival of events, is running now at the Tate Britain, London; Turner Contemporary, Margate, and galleries around the UK Jones, Jonathan. Why JMW Turner is still Britain’s best artist, 250 years on. The Guardian, 19 April 2025. Portraits of J. M. W. Turner at the National Portrait Gallery, London J.M.W. Turner: Watercolors from Tate 2019 exhibit at the Mystic Seaport Museum J.M.W. Turner: Quest for the Sublime 2020 exhibition at the Frist Art Museum Turner’s Modern World 2022 exhibition at the Museum of Fine Arts Boston J. M. W. Turner: Romance and Reality 2025 exhibition at the Yale Center for British Art Turner and Constable 2025 exhibition at the Tate Britain"@"J. M. W. Turner"@"romanticism"